#summary Describes the Configuration Class (Core).
#labels Core

= Configuration (Core Class) =

The configuration system handles loading & using configuration files. It's used throughout the framework for all kinds of configuration purposes.

The files itself are basically [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file .ini files]. The only difference is that they support references to other configuration items.

Once loaded the configuration files are cached in the database.

== Configuration structure ==

The configuration files work as [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file usual .ini files].

Assigning values is just a matter of defining key and value pairs:

{{{
name=value
}}}

Values can be grouped in sections, however only one depth is allowed.

{{{
[section]
}}}

Line comments can be defined with a semicolon at the start of the line.

{{{
; comment text
}}}

The Zeitgeist .ini files also support references and arrays. See below for details.

== Using the configuration files ==

The configuration files are accessible through the configuration system (zgConfiguration). The configuration class is a singleton, so every class and method can access the configuration information once it's loaded.

{{{
$configuration = zgConfiguration::init();
}}}

You may then load a configuration file. Each configuration file is loaded with a handler to it.

{{{
$configuration->loadConfiguration('config_example', './configuration/example_configuration.ini');
}}}

In this example, the handler is "config_example". To access the configuration, just call it by the handler:

{{{
$configdata = $configuration->getConfiguration('config_example');
}}}

This will actually load the entire configuration in an associative array. You may give additional parameters to access only a specific section or key:

{{{
$configurationdata = $configuration->getConfiguration(CONFIGURATIONHANDLE, BLOCK, KEY);
}}}

== References ==

As said the configuration files support references to other configurations:

{{{
key = [[CONFIGURATIONHANDLE.BLOCK.KEY]]
}}}

References are just dynamic links to another configuration item. The referenced item has to be loaded previously to calling it.

It's only possible to link to another configuration item, not to another block or handle.

== Value Arrays ==

Values can be grouped into arryas. For this, just use the key and address it as an associative array:

{{{
key[id] = 12345
key[name] = testarray
key[description] = this shows you how a configuration array works
}}}

By addressing the key you will get an associative array containing your configuration array.

== Module configuration ==

Each module has a configuration file, located in the module directory and named the same as the module: "./MODULENAME/MODULENAME.ini".

It holds general configuration items needed by the module, for example template and table references and so on. It might also hold items used to configure the actions, for example [ClassParameters parameter definitions] etc.

== Examples ==

Examples can be found [source:/examples/zeitgeist_examples/modules/configuration/configuration.module.php here].