#summary Tutorial - How to create a simple PBBG, part 1
#labels Phase-Implementation,Tutorial

= Part 1 - Introduction =

This tutorial is about creating a working persistent browser based game with the Zeitgeist Framework. To keep it simple, we're just doing a simple Tic Tac Toe game. However we will use a much Zeitgeist specific functionalities as possible to show how they work.

If you have specific questions about the tutorial, please mail us or open an [http://code.google.com/p/zeitgeist-framework/issues/list issue].

== The Game ==

The game will be a working implementation of [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tic-tac-toe Tic Tac Toe] where two players play against each other. The game has the following properties:

 * The game will only feature player against player, no AI
 * A player has to be logged in to play
 * A player has an account that counts wins, losses and ties
 * Each win earns the player points
 * The player clicks "play". This will either open a new game or match him to a already open game.
 * A player can only play one game at a time
 * A game ends if a player wins, the game is tied or one player forfeits

== Setup ==

=== Basics ===

To develop something like a PBBG, it's always a good idea to have a local development environment. For a Zeitgeist based game, this would include a webserver, PHP5 and MySQL5. 

If you don't have this already running on your machine, [http://www.apachefriends.org/en/xampp.html XAMPP] will help you set all this up on your Windows / Mac / Linux machine.



 * Some *SVN client* to get the current versions of the framework and example project

[http://tortoisesvn.tigris.org/ Tortoise SVN] for example is a simple SVN client for Windows. The versions in the [http://code.google.com/p/zeitgeist-framework/downloads/list Download section] will work as well, but SVN checkouts are preferred.

== Setup ==


